---
layout: post
title: Fast and Furious - Fail Fast
tags: fail fast furious 
---

We've all heard the phrase fail fast. Also, fail fast, fail often; or fail fast, succeed faster has been around for years. Fail fast suggests that if it is possible to learn from a specific failure, the sooner the failure occurs, the learning can start as quickly as possible.

Invalid inputs to a system are a common source of problems in applications. Sometimes, these problems are persisted, resulting in a corrupt or invalid state. Because of that, the resulting state can not be avoided or fixed and can cause an unresponsive and resource-consuming system.

Failing fast allows getting quick feedback about what works and what does not to adjust the project development plans accordingly.

> Practices like defensive programming and patterns like guard clauses are frequently applied to follow the fail-fast principle.

> A common way to apply defensive programming is by verifying inputs to individual function or method code to check itself as it runs.

> Guard clause, guard code, or guard statement, is a check of integrity preconditions used to avoid errors during execution.

> The defensive programming uses a set of guard statements.

Fail fast doesn't just apply to the coding. In today's complex business environment, speed of execution is a lot more important than perfect execution. For example, after launching a new product, the constant interplay between feedback from the market and adaptation of features can speed the quality improvement.

